What is diabetes?
According to World Health Organization, diabetes is a chronic disease that occurs either when the pancreas does not produce enough insulin or when the body cannot effectively use the insulin it produces. In layman’s language, diabetes is a dangerous disease when there is too much sugar in your blood.
There are three main types of diabetes:
Type 1 diabetes – Your body does not make insulin. This is a problem because you need insulin to take the sugar (glucose) from the foods you eat and turn it into energy for your body. You need to take insulin every day to live.
Type 2 diabetes – Your body does not make or use insulin well. You may need to take pills or insulin to help control your diabetes. Type 2 is the most common type of diabetes.
Gestational (jest-TAY-shun-al) diabetes – Some women get this kind of diabetes when they are pregnant. Most of the time, it goes away after the baby is born. But even if it goes away, these women and their children have a greater chance of getting diabetes later in life. 

What is type 2 diabetes?
Type 2 diabetes is a chronic health condition in which the body doesn’t produce enough insulin or resists insulin. Many people don’t get the regular signs of diabetes like increased urination, enhanced hunger, a feeling of tiredness all the time, and blurred vision. Type 2 diabetes is the most common type of diabetes among people across the world. The two prime reasons for “type 2 diabetes” are – obesity and physical inactivity.

What is prediabetes?
Prediabetes is known as “borderline” diabetes. It means a health condition in which the blood sugar level is high but not as high as to be“type 2” diabetes. Usually, the symptoms of pre-diabetes are: peeing more than normal, feeling thirsty more, feeling tired more than normal, and having blurred vision. People who are susceptible to pre-diabetes are – those who are above 45, those who have heart disease, polycystic ovary syndrome, obesity, belly fat, high cholesterol, and those who don’t exercise.

What are the 3 most common symptoms of undiagnosed diabetes?
An increase in the number of peeing, an increased thirst, and enhanced hunger are the 3 most commonly found undiagnosed diabetes symptoms. 

Can diabetes be cured permanently?
Type 1 diabetes can never be cured permanently because it is a metabolic disorder in which the pancreas produces almost no insulin and that results in an enhanced blood sugar level. As it is an autoimmune disease, there is no permanent cure. Type 2 diabetes, on the other hand, can be controlled with a change in your diet, workout regimen, and lifestyle choices. With considerable effort, one can reach a normal blood sugar level and lead a medicine-free life.

Is diabetes reversible in early stages?
In the early stages of diabetes, i.e., in the first 3-5 years, if you follow a strict diet, exercise regularly, restrict your calories, sleep well, release tensions, quit smoking and drinking, and take medicine as prescribed by the doctor, you may be able to reverse diabetes. But again this is possible for type 2 diabetes patients.

How long can you have diabetes without knowing?
Yes, it is possible that you may have diabetes and not know about it for quite some time. In type 2 diabetes, most of the affected people aren’t aware of the disease due to this lack of any diabetes symptoms. From a few months to years – this unawareness may vary from person to person. But when you have the slightest doubt or when your doctor asks you to get the blood sugar test done, do not delay the process.

How can I naturally beat diabetes?
Once you are affected by diabetes, you can only follow the charts prepared by your doctors and nutritionists. A proper strategy will always work in your favor to beat the surged glucose levels. Adhering to simple lifestyle rules will help you recover from diabetes disease:

Eat on time
Count your calories
Never miss your medicine
Test blood sugar at regular intervals
Exercise regularly
Sleep in time (no late night) and sleep well (a sound sleep)
Quit drinking and smoking
Go for strength training
Manage carbohydrates
Increase fiber-rich food types
Go for foods with a low glycemic index
Opt for magnesium and chromium-rich foods
Do not stress out about anything
Apart from these strategies that may help you cut down your sugar levels naturally, you can also include the following types of food in your diet: –

Apple cider vinegar
Cinnamon
Fenugreek
Gymnema
Aloe Vera
Zinc-rich foods like legumes, seeds, or whole grains
Fruits and vegetables rich in fiber like pears, strawberries, avocados, apples, bananas, carrots, raspberries, beet, broccoli, banana, etc. 
How can I test my diabetes at home without a machine?
You can opt for the traditional home glucose monitor to get your diabetes test done. Here, you need to prick your finger with a lancet or sharp needle and put a drop of blood on the test strip. Now, place the strip into a meter that will show your blood sugar levels. Record this result to show it to your doctor. The meters are available in a variety of forms. Some are costlier, some are bigger in size, some have better speed, and some have spoken instructions.

Which is worse type 1 or 2 diabetes?

There is nothing good about diseases and any form of any disease is worst than worse. Still, if both types of diabetes have to be compared then type 2 diabetes is believed to be milder than type 1. Although type 2 diabetes also brings complications in the kidney, heart, and eyes but again it is something that you can control with a changed lifestyle, following a strict diet chart, exercising regularly, and consuming medicines as prescribed by your doctor. By following these simple rules, you can soon notice a positive change in your body and might lead a medicine-free life. But that can never happen with type 1 diabetes.

How do you feel when your blood sugar is too high?
The signs that your body shows when you have high blood sugar or the way a person feels in high blood sugar are: –

Feeling hungry often
Unintentional and unhealthy weight loss
Feeling thirsty more
A constant feeling of fatigue or tiredness
Any cuts or sores don’t heal easily
Blurry vision
Lack of sleep
Frequent headaches
A tingling or numb feeling in hands and feet
Dry mouth
Peeing more than normal
Rapid heartbeat
Is cow’s milk good for diabetic patients?
No, cow’s milk is not good for diabetic patients. When you have either type 1 or type 2 diabetes, you have to watch the calories and carbohydrates. In cow’s milk there are carbohydrates that will break down and become sugar in your bloodstream leading to a surge in your blood sugar level. If you want to have milk, you can opt for fat-free or low-fat milk. By opting for low-fat or fat-free milk, your body can absorb the essential doses of calcium only minus any unwanted or unhealthy fat.

Does staying up late at night cause diabetes?
Lack of proper sleep has been associated with diabetes because that causes insulin resistance. Sleep and diabetes actually go hand in hand. Due to diabetes, you may feel a loss of sleep and as you cannot sleep your diabetes level will surge. Nutritionists and doctors suggest eating right and eating on time throughout the day and if you follow them religiously, you will notice a change. And those who don’t have diabetes but stay up late at night must change their lifestyle to avoid any blood sugar related issues.

Is there any relation between consuming excess sugar and getting diabetes?
Being overweight or obese or having a large waistline coupled with physical inactivity are the causes of diabetes primarily. But having said that, one cannot also ignore the fact that those who drink sugar-sweetened beverages regularly have a roughly 25% greater risk of type 2 diabetes. Also, those countries where sugar consumption is the highest have shown the highest rates of type 2 diabetes. So, if you want to avoid any early signs of diabetes or getting diabetic, simply avoid sweets or limit the consumption. And in case you cannot control that lure of sweet items, then work out more.

Why diabetes is called silent killer?
Diabetes refers to a health condition in which the level of sugar in the bloodstream is more than the normal limit. This often has a damaging effect on other things in the body starting from cardiovascular diseases to kidney functions, eyesight to high blood pressure. In a nutshell, once you have diabetes and you don’t work towards lowering the level, there will be many other complicated issues or diseases that your body will welcome. That’s the prime reason behind calling diabetes a silent killer.
Take diabetes seriously.
A man talks to his doctor
You may have heard people say they have “a touch of diabetes” or that their “sugar is a little high.” These words suggest that diabetes is not a serious disease. That is not correct. Diabetes is serious, but you can learn to manage it.

People with diabetes need to make healthy food choices, stay at a healthy weight, move more every day, and take their medicine even when they feel good. It’s a lot to do. It’s not easy, but it’s worth it!

Why take care of your diabetes?
Taking care of yourself and your diabetes can help you feel good today and in the future. When your blood sugar (glucose) is close to normal, you are likely to:

have more energy
be less tired and thirsty
need to pass urine less often
heal better
have fewer skin or bladder infections
You will also have less chance of having health problems caused by diabetes such as:

heart attack or stroke
eye problems that can lead to trouble seeing or going blind
pain, tingling, or numbness in your hands and feet, also called nerve damage
kidney problems that can cause your kidneys to stop working
teeth and gum problems
check markActions you can take
check mark Ask your health care team what type of diabetes you have.

check mark Learn where you can go for support.

check mark Learn how caring for your diabetes helps you feel good today and in the future.

Step 2: Know your diabetes ABCs.
A woman speaking with her doctor
Talk to your health care team about how to manage your A1C, Blood pressure, and Cholesterol. This can help lower your chances of having a heart attack, stroke, or other diabetes problems.

A for the A1C test (A-one-C).
What is it?
The A1C is a blood test that measures your average blood sugar level over the past three months. It is different from the blood sugar checks you do each day.

Why is it important?
You need to know your blood sugar levels over time. You don’t want those numbers to get too high. High levels of blood sugar can harm your heart, blood vessels, kidneys, feet, and eyes.

What is the A1C goal?
The A1C goal for many people with diabetes is below 7. It may be different for you. Ask what your goal should be.

B for Blood pressure.
A nurse takes the blood pressure of an elderly lady
What is it?
Blood pressure is the force of your blood against the wall of your blood vessels.

Why is it important?
If your blood pressure gets too high, it makes your heart work too hard. It can cause a heart attack, stroke, and damage your kidneys and eyes.

What is the blood pressure goal?
The blood pressure goal for most people with diabetes is below 140/90. It may be different for you. Ask what your goal should be.

C for Cholesterol (ko-LESS-tuh-ruhl).
What is it?
There are two kinds of cholesterol in your blood: LDL and HDL.

LDL or “bad” cholesterol can build up and clog your blood vessels. It can cause a heart attack or stroke.

HDL or “good” cholesterol helps remove the “bad” cholesterol from your blood vessels.

What are the LDL and HDL goals?
Ask what your cholesterol numbers should be. Your goals may be different from other people. If you are over 40 years of age, you may need to take a statin drug for heart health.

check markActions you can take
check mark Ask your health care team:
what your A1C, blood pressure, and cholesterol numbers are and what they should be. Your ABC goals will depend on how long you have had diabetes, other health problems, and how hard your diabetes is to manage.
what you can do to reach your ABC goals
check markWrite down your numbers on the record at the back of this booklet to track your progress.
Step 3: Learn how to live with diabetes.
An older asian man doing work in his garden
It is common to feel overwhelmed, sad, or angry when you are living with diabetes. You may know the steps you should take to stay healthy, but have trouble sticking with your plan over time. This section has tips on how to cope with your diabetes, eat well, and be active.

Cope with your diabetes.
Stress can raise your blood sugar. Learn ways to lower your stress. Try deep breathing, gardening, taking a walk, meditating, working on your hobby, or listening to your favorite music.
Ask for help if you feel down. A mental health counselor, support group, member of the clergy, friend, or family member who will listen to your concerns may help you feel better.
Eat well.
Make a diabetes meal plan with help from your health care team.
Choose foods that are lower in calories, saturated fat, trans fat, sugar, and salt.
Eat foods with more fiber, such as whole grain cereals, breads, crackers, rice, or pasta.
Choose foods such as fruits, vegetables, whole grains, bread and cereals, and low-fat or skim milk and cheese.
Drink water instead of juice and regular soda.
A plate of food with proportions listed
When eating a meal, fill half of your plate with fruits and vegetables, one quarter with a lean protein, such as beans, or chicken or turkey without the skin, and one quarter with a whole grain, such as brown rice or whole wheat pasta.
Be active.
A family walking
Set a goal to be more active most days of the week. Start slow by taking 10 minute walks, 3 times a day.
Twice a week, work to increase your muscle strength. Use stretch bands, do yoga, heavy gardening (digging and planting with tools), or try push-ups.
Stay at or get to a healthy weight by using your meal plan and moving more.
Know what to do every day.
Take your medicines for diabetes and any other health problems even when you feel good. Ask your doctor if you need aspirin to prevent a heart attack or stroke. Tell your doctor if you cannot afford your medicines or if you have any side effects.
Check your feet every day for cuts, blisters, red spots, and swelling. Call your health care team right away about any sores that do not go away.
Brush your teeth and floss every day to keep your mouth, teeth, and gums healthy.
Stop smoking. Ask for help to quit. Call 1-800-QUITNOW (1-800-784-8669).
Keep track of your blood sugar. You may want to check it one or more times a day. Use the card at the back of this booklet to keep a record of your blood sugar numbers. Be sure to talk about it with your health care team.
Check your blood pressure if your doctor advises and keep a record of it.
Talk to your health care team.
Ask your doctor if you have any questions about your diabetes.
Report any changes in your health.
check markActions you can take
check markAsk for a healthy meal plan.
check markAsk about ways to be more active.
check markAsk how and when to test your blood sugar and how to use the results to manage your diabetes.
check markUse these tips to help with your self-care.
check markDiscuss how your diabetes plan is working for you each time you visit your health care team.
Step 4: Get routine care to stay healthy.
See your health care team at least twice a year to find and treat any problems early.

At each visit, be sure you have a:
blood pressure check
foot check
weight check
review of your self-care plan
Two times each year, have an:
A1C test. It may be checked more often if it is over 7.
Once each year, be sure you have a:
cholesterol test
complete foot exam
dental exam to check teeth and gums
dilated eye exam to check for eye problems
flu shot
urine and a blood test to check for kidney problems
At least once in your lifetime, get a:
pneumonia (nu-mo-nya) shot
hepatitis B (HEP-uh-TY-tiss) shot
Medicare and diabetes.
If you have Medicare, check to see how your plan covers diabetes care. Medicare covers some of the costs for:

diabetes education
diabetes supplies
diabetes medicine
visits with a dietitian
special shoes, if you need them
check markActions you can take
check markAsk your health care team about these and other tests you may need. Ask what your results mean.

check markWrite down the date and time of your next visit.

check markUse the card at the back of this booklet to keep a record of your diabetes care.

check markIf you have Medicare, check your plan.

Things to Remember:
You are the most important member of your health care team.
Follow the four steps in this booklet to help you learn how to manage your diabetes.
Learn how to reach your diabetes ABC goals.
Ask your health care team for help.
